hi everyone welcome to weekly insights
today I'd like to talk about the
difference between narcissism and
self-love there's a tendency for people
to think that these two terms mean the
same thing that narcissism simply refers
to an inflated sense of self-importance
but the concept of narcissism is
actually much more broad it's
foundational to psychology and it
encompasses both a healthy and distorted
or even abusive relationship with self
healthy self-love or healthy narcissism
involves having a stable realistic and
positive relationship with self in many
ways healthy self-love is like having a
healthy love for another person one
where you acknowledge that person's
flaws and imperfections but you still
accept and value them for who they are
while your emotions might fluctuate
depending on circumstances your basic
feeling of care for them does not and
this is because you see and value the
actual person not just their performance
or how they make you feel healthy
self-love involves a similar ability to
see and value yourself as a
three-dimensional person one whose
fundamental value doesn't rise or fall
depending on performance it involves
realistically appraising your strengths
and weaknesses being patient with
yourself when you fall short of your
goals gently holding yourself
accountable when you've hurt someone or
made a mistake and providing yourself
with encouragement to grow and develop
As you move through life remember
healthy self-love involves a realistic
stable and positive
self-image in contrast pathological
narcissism involves an unrealistic and
unstable self-image one that's often
driven by a Relentless need to live up
to an idealized version of the self this
creates internal pressure to perform to
achieve
or to project a facade of success often
this comes at the expense of
authenticity unlike healthy self-love
which strives to value and accept the
whole self pathological narcissism
resembles an unhealthy relationship with
another person one that's conditional
and dependent on constant validation or
Perfection imagine for a second if you
only loved another person when they met
your expectations but you dismissed or
devou valued them whenever they fell
short this wouldn't be real love it
would be an attachment to an ideal or a
fantasy rather than to the person
themselves pathological narcissism works
in the same way it's less about
embracing the self and more about
chasing an unattainable image now this
pattern of relating to oneself doesn't
emerge in a vacuum identity is
co-constructed in significant
relationships throughout our lives and
pathological narcissism often stems from
internalized distorted self-images that
are formed during early childhood these
self-images are shaped by our
interactions with caregivers peers and
other significant figures and they
reflect how we were seen how we were
valued or devalued by other people
addressing these deeply rooted patterns
requires the corrective experience of a
different relationship and that's why
these issues are best explored in the
context of therapy where a licensed
therapist provides a safe and consistent
environment for understanding and change
treatment involves slowly constructing a
new self-image in the context of the
therapeutic relationship this new image
is tempered by the therapist's awareness
and acceptance of your flaws and
Imperfections and it's grounded in the
therapist's ability to perceive you in a
realistic light and also in their
curiosity to know you as a whole person
since not everyone has access to therapy
another helpful practice can be
self-reflection notice how you're
talking to yourself and imagine if you
would speak that way to a loved one
notice if you're being overly critical
or unrealistically idealizing of
yourself the goal is to develop a stable
realistic and accepting relationship
with who you are and this shift involves
being mindful of how you treat yourself
and trying to offer yourself the same
Grace and compassion that you might
offer someone that you cared about
remember this is a journey not a
destination and it's okay to take small
steps along the way okay so that's it
for today as always thanks for watching
and if you found this helpful you can
receive these videos on a weekly basis
by becoming a paid member of my channel
your support is appreciated because it
helps me to make more content more
frequently I hope this Insight helps you
on your journey of self-discovery and
self-acceptance and until next time take
good care
[Music]